Sarawak Bumi Kenyalang is not only rich in cultural heritage from its various races but also rich in traditional games inherited from time immemorial and this traditional game is still maintained by its integrity until now.

Of course, each of these traditional games also has its own history and its speciality is also taboo which of course many Sarawakians themselves do not know it. To uphold our knowledge of Sarawakians especially about every game of this traditional game, Borneo Oracle will open a new genre in the articles of Traditional Game Genre for every ethnic group in Sarawak so that we have a sufficient source of information in talking about the traditional richness of Sarawak.

Sarawak's Traditional Ethnic Game Genre for this time we will present an article about a traditional game from Ethnic Melanau, Tibow, a giant swing where the game is often held during the celebration of the Kaul Festival for the Melanau Sarawak community.

Tibow or Pisa’ Tibow is one of the traditional games inherited since time immemorial by the ethnic Melanau Sarawak. Traditional games are usually played during the Harvest Festival which is a unique festival from the Sarawak Melanau ethnicity celebrated every year and is one of the annual events in the Sarawak Earth Kenyalang tourism calendar.

Tibow, a giant swing game, is one of the must-have traditional games when the festival takes place. The game is actually one of the symbols of unity and fun (recollecting in the dialect of the Melanau language) and is an attraction to the brave Melanau youths only because of the many stunts that occur during the game.

According to the oral story delivered from generation to generation in the Sarawak Melanau community, the game of tibow dates back to time. And in the book written by Shahnil Asmar Saaid and Mohamed Roselan Malek there is a story about the legendary story behind this tibow game. It is said that once upon a time there was a village called Kampung Pentian in Mukah, Sarawak was hit by an epidemic that could be fatal.

As a result of the outbreak, many residents of Kampung Pentian died and all efforts have been made to eradicate the outbreak continue but often the effort has no solution. As a result of the many residents who were sacrificed, it was told that Kampung Pentian became a quiet village because almost every family was in a mourning atmosphere.

It is narrated that one night, an old Melanau man in Kampung Pentian had a dream come to a giant eagle who taught the old man to build a tibow and a way to play.

After waking up from her sleep, the old man told a story of his dream to a shaman because at that time the whole community of Melanau still practiced pagan or believed in the spirit so the shaman was their medium to interpret the story behind their dreams. Based on the assumptions of this shaman, the dream was extended to the leader of the Melanau community in Kampung Pentian.

Because of this belief, the people of the men and women of Kampung Pentian have joined forces to build a giant cradle or tibow as it means in the old man's dream. According to the story, after the construction of the tibow, there was no more outbreak of the deadly disease in Kampung Pentian. And from that day, Tibow is a must-have traditional game in every festival for the people of Melanau Sarawak from before until now.

The construction of a tibow can not be built indiscriminately because it also has taboos that should be followed. During the construction of the tibow, the Melanau community will play a set of canang and hammered drums to enliven the construction atmosphere. The two wooden pillars of which are more than 30 feet long will be the basis for the construction of this tibow. When it comes to raising these two pillars, the menalau's estate will be sung.

This poem is one of the favors of Ipo Tibow or Dewa who dominates the game of Tibow and aims to ask God for help so that all construction matters are facilitated. The process of the other structures will begin. The construction of the Tibow is a shelf or pyramid.

Usually the height of this tibow is between 8 to 10 meters and is built in tilted conditions on flat ground. The Tibow is built into 2 parts, the first part has a sideder that resembles a ladder-like and for the second part consists of 2 pillars in the form of a pyramid. In this part, there will be a rope from the cane and the cane will be swinged from left to right like a giant swing.

This swinging cane will be jumped by a player and then will be jumped next by the player to 3, 4, 5 until this tibow can no longer swing. Sounds simple, but only brave men will be able to try this game because their height and class are difficult to describe.

That is why the construction of a tibow requires high detail including in choosing the site to set up it because it should be erected firmly on a soft land area and does not have pebbles. This is because the level of safety of the player is also taken into account because if the wrong step then will fall into the face of the earth and there are no mattresses or nets that are the safety base but only the surface of the soil. And that's why Tibow is often set up on the vast and flat seaside.

Now this traditional Melanau ethnic game is still played in the festive events for the Sarawak Melanau community. A traditional game that we should keep taking care of and restoring so that it does not disappear in the mainstream of modernity. Hopefully, this article can give us the space to get to know our traditional game from the ethnic Malayanu Sarawak. We have a traditional game so that it is also in the eyes of the world. This is our traditional game of Sarawakians and we are proud to have it.
